{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg10000\deff0{\fonttbl{\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Arial-BoldMT;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 ArialMT;}{\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f3\fnil\fcharset77 Arial MT;}{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Arial MT;}{\f5\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Arial;}{\f6\fmodern\fprq1\fcharset0 Courier New;}{\f7\fswiss\fcharset77 Arial-BoldItalicMT;}{\f8\fswiss\fcharset77 Arial-ItalicMT;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\generator Msftedit 5.41.15.1515;}\viewkind4\uc1\pard\li180\sb60\qc\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\lang1033\b\f0\fs40 Fresco Client Server Change Log\b0\f1\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\f0\fs20\par
\f2\fs24 1.0.10\par
\b0\f3\fs20 Released: \f2 11/8/2010\f4\par
- Bug Fixed: Forced vegetation transition input rasters were still required to use the .txt file extention. Now .tif can be used.\par
- Major Change: Added a frame type for "Grassland". If you do not want to use the Grassland frame, you do not need to add any new FIF fields. The Grassland frame uses the same FIF fields used by the spruce frames (parameter values specific to Grassland are being determined).\par
\b\f2\fs24\par
\f5\fs20 For the Grassland frame:\par
\b0\f6 Grassland  (unique veg ID between 0 and 254)\par
Grassland.StartAge\par
Grassland.FireParms\par
Grassland.HumanFireProb\par
\par
\b\f5 There are additional FIF fields needed to let the Decid frame succeed to Grassland:\b0\f6\par
Decid->Grassland.History = X\par
\f5 Integer. Number of years to collect results from the regression equation.\par
\f6\par
Decid->Grassland.ClimateWeight = \{Intercept, t3, t4, t5, t6, t7, p3, p4, p5, p6, p7, IfFlat\}\par
\f5 Array of 12 floating point values. Parameters for the regression equation.\f6\par
\par
Decid->Grassland.ClimateThreshholds = \{Low, Moderate, High_LSS, High_HSS, Low_WasGrassland, Moderate_WasGrassland\}\par
\f5 Array of 6 floating point values. The severity of the last burn determines the threshold that must be exceeded by the summed results of X years of the climate regression equation in order to succeed to Grassland. Must provide thresholds for Low, Moderate, High w/ LSS and High w/ HSS burn severities as well as an extra threshold for Low and Moderate for cases where the previous vegetation type was already Grassland.\f6\par
\b\f2\fs24\par
\f5\fs20 And don't forget to include the extra months:\par
\b0\f6 Climate.TempMonths = \{3,4,5,6,7\}\par
Climate.PrecipMonths = \{3,4,5,6,7\}\par
\f5 This will not affect the climate fire probability equation which still only uses Mar through June for temperature and June and July for precipitation.\b\f2\fs24\par
\par
\par
1.0.9\par
\b0\f3\fs20 Released: \f2 10/25/2010\f4\par
- Bug Fixed: it was possible for a temperature value to contain a nodata value but still be summed with a temperature offset value, resulting in an innappropriate temperature value for any cells that had set temperature to nodata. \par
- Major Change: Spatial input files must now be in the GeoTIFF format and all spatial output is written in the GeoTIFF format. GeoTIFF is a binary file format that allows data to be stored more efficiently than the text based ASCII Grid format that has been used in ALFRESCO until now. There are many tools available to convert from ASCII Grid files to GeoTIFF files including the free GDAL tools. \cf1\highlight2 If the NODATA value metadata tag is not specified, the default NODATA value for the given datatype is assumed (see Supported Datatypes below for defaults). Best performance is seen when input files use the default NODATA value for the given datatype and the NODATA metadata tag is set with the same value.\par
\cf0\highlight0\par
\pard\li180\sb60\cf1\highlight2\b Supported Raster Datatypes:\b0\par
\f6    TYPE   |    MIN VAL    |   MAX VAL    | DEFAULT NODATA\par
----------------------------------------------------------\par
  Byte    |            0  |         255  |          255\par
  INT32   |  -2147483648  |  2147483648  |  -2147483648\par
  FLOAT32 |     -3.4e+38  |     3.4e+38  |     -3.4e+38\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\cf0\highlight0\b\f2\fs24\par
\pard\li180\sb60\cf1\highlight2\f4\fs20 Input Raster Files\b0\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\cf0\highlight0\b\tab Byte (value range of 0 through 255, default nodata = 255)\par
\b0\tab Vegetation Type (any valid veg ID)\par
\tab Vegetation Type Transition (any valid veg ID)\par
\tab Topography (0 and 1)\par
\tab Burn Severity (0=No Burn, 1=Low, 2=Moderate, 3=High w/ Low Surface Severity, 4=High w/ High Surface Severity)\par
\tab Fire History (0 and 1)\par
\tab Human Ignitions (0 and 1)\par
\tab Fire Suppression Levels (0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5)\par
\tab\par
\b\tab Int (value range of -2147483648 through 2147483648, default nodata = -2147483648)\par
\b0\tab Stand Age\par
\tab Tree Density\par
\par
\b\tab Float (value range of -3.4e+38 through 3.4e+38, default nodata = -3.4e+38)\par
\b0\tab Site\par
\tab Temperature\par
\tab Precipitation\par
\tab External Flammability\par
\tab Fire Ignition Factor\par
\tab Fire Spread Sensitivity\par
\par
\pard\li180\sb60\cf1\highlight2\b Output Raster Files\b0\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\cf0\highlight0\b\tab Byte (value range of 0 through 255, nodata = 255)\par
\b0\tab Vegetation Type  (any valid veg ID)\par
\tab Subcanopy  (any valid veg ID)\par
\tab Burn Severity (0=No Burn, 1=Low, 2=Moderate, 3=High w/ Low Surface Severity, 4=High w/ High Surface Severity)\par
\tab Burn Severity History (0=No Burn, 1=Low, 2=Moderate, 3=High w/ Low Surface Severity, 4=High w/ High Surface Severity)\par
\tab Decid: Species Trajectory  (Black Spruce and White Spruce IDs)\par
\tab\par
\b\tab Int (value range of -2147483648 through 2147483648, nodata = -2147483648)\par
\b0\tab Stand Age\par
\tab Fire Age\par
\tab\par
\b\tab Float (value range of -3.4e+38 through 3.4e+38, nodata = -3.4e+38)\par
\b0\tab Site\par
\tab Fire Scars\par
\tab Tundra: Basal Area\par
\par
\b New FIF Fields\par
\b0 RequireAAEACProjectedInputRasters = TRUE       ; (optional -- defaults to TRUE) if TRUE, each input raster file will be checked for the Alaska Albers projection.\par
ApplyAAEACProjectionToOutputRasters = TRUE   ; (optional -- defaults to TRUE) if TRUE, each output raster file will include metadata for the Alaska Albers projection.\b\par
\b0\par
\b Modified FIF Fields\b0\par
MapFlags -- the field hasn't changed, but the species specific output type flags for Decid and Tundra have been placed onto two separate flag values rather than sharing the 0x000100 flag. The FIF comments to describe the species specific options used to be this:\par
\f6 ; 0x000100   Decid: species trajectory; Tundra: basal area\f4\par
Now it should read like this: \par
\f6 ; 0x000100   Decid: species trajectory\par
; 0x000200   Tundra: basal area\f4\par
\b\f0\fs24\par
\f4\fs20 Depricated FIF Fields \b0 (they can now be removed from your FIF files for use with 1.0.9 and beyond)\par
NoData (you can now specify nodata values per raster input file, those values will then be mapped to the default nodata values listed above for internal use and for output)\b\f2\fs24\par
\par
\par
1.0.8\par
\b0\f3\fs20 Released: \f4 6\f3 /\f4 24\f3 /20\f4 10\par
- Bug Fixed: in some circumstances an empty directory tree was created -- typically at the root of the C drive.\b\f3\par
\b0\f4 - FRESCO Server can now be configured to accept client connections over ports other than the default 9051. In the top menu, select \i Settings | Edit Settings.\b\i0\f3\par
\b0\f4 - Input and output can now live in very separate locations (eg: different storage volumes) and any FIF field that specifies a path can be either an absolute path (eg: C:\\absolute\\path\\to\\something\\) or a relative path (relative\\path\\to\\something\\).  Relative paths are appended to the input base path if it is an input field or to the output base path if it is an output field.  Some FIF fields were changed to allow this.  These changes break backward compatibility with old FIFs.  \par
\par
New Fields\par
----------\par
ClientFifPath\par
ClientInputBasePath\par
ClientOutputBasePath\par
ServerOutputBasePath\par
\b\f0\fs24\par
\b0\f4\fs20 Depricated Fields (they can now be removed from your FIF files for use with 1.0.8 and beyond)\par
-----------------\par
ServerBaseDirectory\par
ClusterBaseDirectory\par
Output.Directory\par
Output.Type  -- now defaults to using the timestamp output directory.\b\f0\fs24\par
\par
1.0.\f2 7\b0\f1\fs20\par
Released: \f2 11\f1 /\f2 24\f1 /200\f2 9\par
- Note: this version is backwards compatible with FIF files as old as version 1.0.5.\par
- Added an optional FIF field to enable externally calculated climate-flammability values to be loaded per year rather than being calculated in ALFRESCO. The field is Climate.Flammability.File and it accepts a single string specifying the file path template for the series of yearly climate-flammability files.\b\f0\fs24\par
\par
1.0.\f2 6\b0\f1\fs20\par
Released: \f2 9\f1 /\f2 24\f1 /200\f2 9\par
- Note: FIF files from version 1.0.5 still work with this version.\f1\par
- Bug Fixed\f2 : Climate.Values.RandExplicit.MinYear and Climate.Values.RandExplicit.MaxYear FIF parameters can now have values outside the range of the min and max year for the simulation, but still must be greater or equal to 0.\f1\par
- \f2 Spatial vegetation input files that contain the value given for the \i NoData\i0  FIF field are now used to create NoVeg grid cells.  This pertains to both landscape initialization and vegetation transitions.  Note that the \i NoVeg\i0  FIF parameter can also be changed to the same value used for \i NoData\i0  for a similar effect.\par
- Depricated the \i NumSpecies\i0  FIF field since it can be easily calculated in within the code.\par
- Added a Grassland vegetation type.  It is in a very\i  \i0 preliminary stage for internal testing.\b\f0\fs24\par
\par
1.0.\f2 5\b0\f1\fs20    \par
Released: \f2 1\f1 /\f2 6\f1 /200\f2 9\f1\par
- Bug Fixed\f2 : unexpected behavior was possible when calculating the spread of burn severity.\f1\par
- Bug Fixed\f2 : the FIF value, BurnSeverity.LSS-vs-HSS.wt, was evaluating the reverse of what is documented.  Now a low value (closer to 0.0) truely indicates that low surface severity (LSS) is more likely, and a high value (closer to 1.0) truely indicates a higher chance of HSS.\f1\par
\b\f0\fs24\par
1.0.4\b0\f1\fs20    \par
Released: 6/2/2008\par
- Bug Fixed: Decid.FireProb was being set to the value of Tundra.FireProb when Decid.FireProb.IsAgeDependent was FALSE.\par
\b\f0\par
\fs24 1.0.3\b0\f1\fs20    \par
Released: 5/28/2008\par
- New FIF Field: Tundra.FireProb.IsAgeDependent = <TRUE or FALSE>.  If TRUE: Tundra.FirePorb requires an array of three parameters \{k,a,b\} in that order for a logistic function k/(1+exp(a-b*x)) used to translate age to fire factor. If FALSE: Tundra.FireProb requires a single constant value (no array).\par
- New FIF Field: Decid.FireProb.IsAgeDependent = <TRUE or FALSE>.  If TRUE: Decid.FirePorb requires an array of three parameters \{k,a,b\} in that order for a logistic function k/(1+exp(a-b*x)) used to translate age to fire factor. If FALSE: Decid.FireProb requires a single constant value (no array).\par
- Bug Fixed: the NumHeader FIF field was being ignored.\par
\pard\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\f0\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs24 1.0.2\b0\f1\fs20    \par
Released: 2/25/2008\par
- Added an optional FIF field, IgnitionDepressor, for each species (e.g., Tundra.IgnitionDepressor).\par
\pard\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\f0\tab\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs24 1.0.1\b0\f1\fs20\par
Released: 12/21/2007\ul\par
\ulnone Summary: More burn severity features and bug fixes.\par
- Added FIF field, UseUniqueBurnSeverityPerRep:\par
\pard\li540\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs16 UseUniqueBurnSeverityPerRep = TRUE \par
; Use unique burn severity input file per rep.  This can prevent a bias due to all reps starting from the same input data.\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs20 - Changed FIF field, YearOfVegAndAgeFiles, to YearOfUniqueInputPerRep.  This field now supplies the year to be used for Veg, Age and/or Burn Severity input maps that are unique per rep.\par
- When the BurnSeverityInputFile FIF field is NOT provided, all cells default to HighLSS (level 3) at year 0 for all reps (regardless of how UseUniqueBurnSeverityPerRep is set).\par
- Fixed a linux client crash.\par
- Fixed a few memory leaks in client (introduced in 1.0.0).\par
- Fixed bug when client connects to server while simulation already in progress.  In such cases, the server would not report that the simulation was complete upon all participating clients completing.\par
- Fixed bug when a client disconnects and remaining clients start a new simulation.  Reps were being distributed inappropriately in such a case.\par
- Fixed a menu button on the server.\par
- Fixed the Progress Viewer clear button icon and the Client Manager icon.\~ They were displaying defaults.\par
- Fixed NoData_value field in GIS headings.  Was showing -1 instead of value provided in FIF.\par
\b\f0\fs24\par
1.0.0\b0\f1\fs20\tab\par
Released: 12/13/2007\ul\par
\ulnone Summary: Added burn severity features to the model.\par
- Added FIF field, BurnSeverityInputFile, to initialize the burn severity levels of the landscape before the simulation starts.  The burn severity levels are:\fs6\tab\par
\pard\li540\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs16\tab 0=no burn\par
\tab 1=Low severity\par
\tab 2=Moderate severity\par
\tab 3=High crown severity with low surface severity\par
\tab 4=High crown severity with high surface severity\par
\fs6\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs20 - Burn severity levels are also generated and assigned to cells during historical fire:\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs16\tab\tab Tundra, always Low (level 1)\par
    \tab\tab Decid, BSpruce and WSpruce, always HighLSS (level 3)\par
\fs20 - Burn severity levels are also generated \lquote real-time\rquote  during non-historical fire:\par
\fs16     \tab\tab Tundra, always Low (level 1)\par
    \tab\tab Decid, always adopts severity from the cell that spread the fire\par
\tab\tab BSpruce and WSpruce, take on any burn severity based on topography and size of the growing fire spread.  \par
\par
\fs20  -Here are the new FIF fields used to generate burn severity levels for BSpruce and WSpruce:\par
\pard\li540\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs16 TopoInputFile = "Input\\Initialization\\Topography.txt" \par
; Spatial topogrphy input file.  0=flat, 1=complex\par
BurnSeverity.FxnOfFireSize = \{0.05, 0.001\}  \par
; Intercept and slope for logistic regression fxn returning probability of High Severity (level 3 or 4) \par
BurnSeverity.LSS-vs-HSS.wt = .5  \par
; Range: (0,1).  The probability that a burn that is assigned High Severity has HSS.  Low value is more likely to be LSS (level 3), high value is more likely to be HSS (level 4). \par
BurnSeverity.Low-vs-Moderate.wt = .5  \par
; Range: (0,1);  The probability that a burn not assigned High Severity has Moderate Severity. Low value is more likely to give Low Severity (level 1), high value is more likely give Moderate (level 2).\par
BurnSeverity.FlatTopo.wt = .6  \par
; Range: (0,1); Prob that Topo spatial correlation overrides initial Severity assignment; eg takes on Severity of \lquote Spreader cell\rquote  \par
BurnSeverity.ComplexTopo.wt = .2  \par
; Range: (0,1); Prob that Topo spatial correlation overrides initial Severity assignment\par
\pard\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs6\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs20 - Decid cells transition over different time frames depending on species trajectory (as before) and the severity of their last burn.  New FIF fields were added in replacement of Decid->BSpruce.Parms and Decid->WSpruce.Parms.  These new fields provide different succession parameters per burn severity level (A*age+B = probability of transition):\par
\fs16\tab Decid->BSpruce.BurnSeverity[1] = \{A, B\}\par
\tab Decid->BSpruce.BurnSeverity[2] = \{A, B\}\tab\par
\tab Decid->BSpruce.BurnSeverity[3] = \{A, B\} \par
\tab Decid->BSpruce.BurnSeverity[4] = \{A, B\} \tab\par
\par
\tab Decid->WSpruce.BurnSeverity[1] = \{A, B\}\tab\tab\par
\tab Decid->WSpruce.BurnSeverity[2] = \{A, B\}\tab\tab\par
\tab Decid->WSpruce.BurnSeverity[3] = \{A, B\}\tab\tab\par
\tab Decid->WSpruce.BurnSeverity[4] = \{A, B\}\tab\tab\par
\fs6\par
\fs20 - Added two spatial output types.  1) burn severity of fire activity within a given year.  2) the burn severity of the last burn for each cell.\par
- Added four new columns \endash  one for each of the burn severities \endash   to the Fire Size Events stat file: Low, Mod, HighLSS, HighHSS.  Added up, they equal the Value column.\par
- Removed three fields from FIF: IsLargeMemoryModel, Output.DotDisplay and Output.ShowSeed (no harm done if fields still exist in your files, but the fields will not be used).\par
\pard\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\f0\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\fs24 Beta 0.2.3\b0\f1\fs20\tab\par
Released: 8/2/2007\ul\par
\ulnone Summary: New features.\ul\par
\ulnone - Added monthly climate input capabilities.  Only compatible with explicit climate input types.  Can still use growing season input.\par
- Added new fire equation used when monthly climate input is provided.  Growing season equation still used with growing season climate input.\par
- Turned off growth factor in the Tundra succession.  Due to the dependency on growing season climate and because the feature has been turned off via FIF settings for a long time, the growth factor is being set to zero.  The growth factor is used to calculate the portion of new basal area of Black Spruce or White Spruce due to growth.\par
- Turned off climate history dependant transitions in Tundra and Decid successions.  Again, this is being turned off due to the dependency on growing season climate and because the feature has been turned off via FIF settings for a long time.\par
- Added batch run ability via the new file list.  Just add more files to the list and run.\b\f0\fs24\par
\par
Beta 0.2.2\b0\f1\fs20\tab\par
Released: 6/29/2007\ul\par
\ulnone Summary: Bug fixes\ul\par
\ulnone - Habitat Stats Were Not Using Age Criteria Correctly.  Fixed\par
\b\f0\fs24\par
Beta 0.2.1\b0\f1\fs20\tab\par
Released: 6/28/2007\ul\par
\ulnone Summary: Bug fixes.\ul\par
\ulnone - Increased Stat Event Capacity\par
- Excluded NoVeg Cells From Historical Fires\par
- Set /LARGEADDRESSAWARE On Server To Use 3GB of Memory Instead of 2GB\par
\par
\b\f0\fs24 Beta 0.2.0\par
\b0\f1\fs20 Released: \tab 6/21/2007\ul\par
\ulnone Summary:\tab Bug fixes and new features for existing tools.\ul\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\ulnone\b\i\f7\tab Added Suppression Transitions Functionality\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 FIF fields changed.  See new demo FIF.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Suppression Stats\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 When suppression is on, stat files are produced showing the area burned within by suppression class.  Each class has its own stat output.  New FIF field: Stat.BurnsBySupp.Flags.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Habitat Stats\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 New FIF fields describe the habitat criteria so that stat files can be produced showing the count of frames that match the criteria.  Right now the only criteria are valid veg types and the age range of vegetation.  New habitats can be tracked by adding new entires into the FIF.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Client Running on Linux and Windows\par
\tab Client Logs on Server Filtered by Selected Client\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 Double click or press enter on a client in the Client Manager and the client\rquote s log is shown.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Client Can Run as Daemon\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 A daemon is a process that runs continuously even when the user that started it is no longer logged on.  The \endash daemon command line argument starts the client as a daemon.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Simple Client Install\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 Installation of client on Linux no longer requires changing the LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable.  Follow ReadMe instructions included in Linux install.\par
ServerAddress.ini files are no longer used to specify the server\rquote s address.  Instead, the \lquote startclient\rquote  script contains the server\rquote s IP address within command line argument, --ip.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Time Estimation\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 Time to completion estimates are given in the Server\rquote s status bar.  The progress viewer provides start and stop timestamps.  The Client Manager shows percent completed for each client.  \par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Version Assertion\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 Makes sure all clients are running the same version.\par
\pard\li180\sb120\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\i\f7\tab Separate Base Directories\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 At the moment, the server is not able to access the cluster\rquote s storage space.  As a temporary work around, the server uses a different base directory than the clients and therefore uses a separate copy of the FIF with the same filename.\par
This should only be a temporary work around until we are either able to provide the server with access to the same storage as the clients or until the server app takes care of all file transfers.\i\f8\fs32\par
\pard\li180\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\f7\fs20\tab\lquote Unknown\rquote  Connections and Delayed Connections Fixed\par
\pard\li900\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b0\i0\f1 Clients were connecting, but sometimes with an unknown state.  As a result they would not participate in simulations.  Fixed.\par
Clients were also experiencing a delayed connection by more than 15 seconds.  Now clients should all connect within 2-5 seconds.\par
\pard\sb60\tx540\tx900\tx1170\tx7200\b\f0\par
}
 